README.md, before:

# Foodi - Made with love, for food lovers!

![Untitled-2023-12-02-0248](https://github.com/iifawzi/foodi/assets/46695441/80e714ac-26fa-48cf-80a6-b86257ce6c53)

## Requirements 📺

A Burger (Product) may have several ingredients:

-   150g Beef
-   30g Cheese
-   20g Onion

The system keeps the stock of each of these ingredients stored in the database. You
can use the following levels for seeding the database:

-   20kg Beef
-   5kg Cheese
-   1kg Onion

When a customer makes an order that includes a Burger. The system needs to update the
the stock of each of the ingredients so it reflects the amounts consumed.
Also when any of the ingredients' stock level reaches 50%, the system should send an
email message to alert the merchant that they need to buy more of this ingredient.

In the sections below, I will explain the requirements that have been approached, the architecture, decisions, and thoughts.

## Installation

The system is configured in a way that it can work with MySQL, Postgres, and SQLite. if you're willing to run it manually you can follow the following steps:

1. Install composer dependencies:

    ```bash
    composer update
    ```
2. Create your configuration file `.env`:

    ```
    cp .env.example .env
    ```
3. Configure the database connections as you wish
4. Configure the SMTP mailing server for mailing notifications.
5. Run database migrations and seeders 
    ```
    php artisan migrate --seed
    ```
6. Run the application in your preferred way, either it's `valet`, `serve`, or any other way. 
    ```bash
    php artisan serve
    ```
7. Start the queue and schedular workers to handle notifications

    ```
    ./vendor/bin/sail php artisan queue:work
    ```

    ```
     ./vendor/bin/sail php artisan schedule:work
    ```

8. Enjoy your order!

### Using Sail

The project also comes with Laravel Sail that runs mysql by default. if you wish you can follow the following steps: 

1. Create your configuration file `.env`:
    ```
    cp .env.example .env
    ```
2. Configure the SMTP mailing server for mailing notifications.

3. Start the Docker containers:

    ```
    ./vendor/bin/sail up -d
    ```

4. Run database migrations and seeders:

    ```
    ./vendor/bin/sail php artisan migrate --seed
    ```

5. Start the queue and schedular workers to handle notifications

    ```
    ./vendor/bin/sail php artisan queue:work
    ```

    ```
     ./vendor/bin/sail php artisan schedule:work
    ```

7. Enjoy your order!

## Deep-Dive!

The system is built to be dependable, able to handle many orders at once, and be straightforward to test while maintaining high-quality standards.

### Code Architecture

![Untitled-2023-12-02-0248](https://github.com/iifawzi/foodi/assets/46695441/36370bab-b3a9-4677-9471-eb21711daac1)


The way I've organized the code follows `SOLID` and `Hexagonal Architecture principles while isolating the domain layer following `ddd-design`, making it easy to understand and maintain.

#### Files Structure
```
src
├── Application
│   ├── ports
│   │   └── infrastructure
│   │       ├── StockNotificationService.php
│   │       └── repositories
│   │           ├── MerchantRepository.php
│   │           ├── OrderRepository.php
│   │           ├── ProductRepository.php
│   │           ├── StockNotificationRepository.php
│   │           └── StockRepository.php
│   └── services
│       └── OrderService.php
├── Domain
│   ├── Entities
│   │   ├── Ingredient.php
│   │   ├── Item.php
│   │   ├── Merchant.php
│   │   ├── Order.php
│   │   ├── StockItem.php
│   │   └── StockTransaction.php
│   ├── Services
│   │   └── OrderUseCases.php
│   └── Types
│       ├── OrderStatus.php
│       ├── StockItemStatus.php
│       └── StockTransactionType.php
└── Infrastructure
    ├── MailingService.php
    ├── repositories
    │   └── Eloquent
    │       ├── EloquentMerchantRepository.php
    │       ├── EloquentOrderRepository.php
    │       ├── EloquentProductRepository.php
    │       ├── EloquentStockNotificationRepository.php
    │       └── EloquentStockRepository.php
    └── types
        └── LowStockNotificationType.php
```

The business logic — the rules and processes we all understand — is encapsulated within the `Domain` directory. This is the common language that resonates with developers, stakeholders, program managers, and everyone involved in the project. It serves as a foundational agreement that unites us in our shared understanding. This also helped in testing and verifying the entire domain logic before thinking about any infrastructure details. 

##### Key Components in the Domain

- Entities:

The heart of the domain is the entities. These hold essential data, representing real-world concepts like orders, ingredients, and the specifics of the food we love. These entities act as the backbone of the system, defining what data we work with and how it relates.

- Use Cases:
  
Within the `useCases`, we zoom in on specific scenarios, like creating an order. Here, use cases focus on the detailed steps and logic involved in executing a particular use case. This approach keeps our business logic organized and easy to follow.

- Isolation and Dependency Management
  
The domain is deliberately isolated, meaning it operates independently of any infrastructure-related logic. This isolation is intentional— it allows us to maintain a clear distinction between what our system does (business logic) and how it does it (infrastructure logic).
https://github.com/iifawzi/foodi/blob/0aa62ae42c20c732d817cde111b30b846647c1e0/src/Application/services/OrderService.php#L15-L26

- Dependency Injection: 

as the code above shows, to facilitate this separation, we adopt a dependency injection approach. Instead of the application layer reaching out to infrastructure components, dependencies are injected into it, thanks to the defined interfaces. 

This ensures flexibility and simplifies testing, as we can substitute real implementations with mocks, as we did in the integration tests. 
where the entire business logic is tested using `in-memory` database. More on that, in the `Testing and Quality` section below.  

https://github.com/iifawzi/foodi/blob/0aa62ae42c20c732d817cde111b30b846647c1e0/tests/Integration/Application/OrderServiceTest.php#L40-L54


The actual implementation of the repositories is on the infrastructure layer, where we can decide what to use, whether are we using `Eloquent` or any other solution, it doesn't matter. as long as they implement the repositories interfaces. 

### System Architecture

Anticipating and mitigating Murphy's Law `if anything can go wrong, it will`, the system architecture takes into account potential challenges:

-   Concurrency Challenge: The system adeptly manages multiple orders simultaneously, ensuring data consistency even during peak times.

-   Mailing Service Reliability: Proactive measures are in place to address potential issues with sending emails. This includes scenarios where the mailing service is non-operational or the mailing queue experiences downtime.

By proactively addressing these challenges, the architecture aspires to furnish a Foodi Orders System characterized by reliability, resilience, and a seamless operational experience.

Commit message:

docs: infrastructure layer and application layer flexibility
Signed-off-by: Fawzi Abdulfattah <iifawzie@gmail.com>

README.md, after:

# Foodi - Made with love, for food lovers!

![Untitled-2023-12-02-0248](https://github.com/iifawzi/foodi/assets/46695441/80e714ac-26fa-48cf-80a6-b86257ce6c53)

## Requirements 📺

A Burger (Product) may have several ingredients:

-   150g Beef
-   30g Cheese
-   20g Onion

The system keeps the stock of each of these ingredients stored in the database. You
can use the following levels for seeding the database:

-   20kg Beef
-   5kg Cheese
-   1kg Onion

When a customer makes an order that includes a Burger. The system needs to update the
the stock of each of the ingredients so it reflects the amounts consumed.
Also when any of the ingredients' stock level reaches 50%, the system should send an
email message to alert the merchant that they need to buy more of this ingredient.

In the sections below, I will explain the requirements that have been approached, the architecture, decisions, and thoughts.

## Installation

The system is configured in a way that it can work with MySQL, Postgres, and SQLite. if you're willing to run it manually you can follow the following steps:

1. Install composer dependencies:

    ```bash
    composer update
    ```
2. Create your configuration file `.env`:

    ```
    cp .env.example .env
    ```
3. Configure the database connections as you wish
4. Configure the SMTP mailing server for mailing notifications.
5. Run database migrations and seeders 
    ```
    php artisan migrate --seed
    ```
6. Run the application in your preferred way, either it's `valet`, `serve`, or any other way. 
    ```bash
    php artisan serve
    ```
7. Start the queue and schedular workers to handle notifications

    ```
    ./vendor/bin/sail php artisan queue:work
    ```

    ```
     ./vendor/bin/sail php artisan schedule:work
    ```

8. Enjoy your order!

### Using Sail

The project also comes with Laravel Sail that runs mysql by default. if you wish you can follow the following steps: 

1. Create your configuration file `.env`:
    ```
    cp .env.example .env
    ```
2. Configure the SMTP mailing server for mailing notifications.

3. Start the Docker containers:

    ```
    ./vendor/bin/sail up -d
    ```

4. Run database migrations and seeders:

    ```
    ./vendor/bin/sail php artisan migrate --seed
    ```

5. Start the queue and schedular workers to handle notifications

    ```
    ./vendor/bin/sail php artisan queue:work
    ```

    ```
     ./vendor/bin/sail php artisan schedule:work
    ```

7. Enjoy your order!

## Deep-Dive!

The system is built to be dependable, able to handle many orders at once, and be straightforward to test while maintaining high-quality standards.

### Code Architecture

![Untitled-2023-12-02-0248](https://github.com/iifawzi/foodi/assets/46695441/36370bab-b3a9-4677-9471-eb21711daac1)


The way I've organized the code follows `SOLID` and `Hexagonal Architecture principles while isolating the domain layer following `ddd-design`, making it easy to understand and maintain.

#### Files Structure
```
src
├── Application
│   ├── ports
│   │   └── infrastructure
│   │       ├── StockNotificationService.php
│   │       └── repositories
│   │           ├── MerchantRepository.php
│   │           ├── OrderRepository.php
│   │           ├── ProductRepository.php
│   │           ├── StockNotificationRepository.php
│   │           └── StockRepository.php
│   └── services
│       └── OrderService.php
├── Domain
│   ├── Entities
│   │   ├── Ingredient.php
│   │   ├── Item.php
│   │   ├── Merchant.php
│   │   ├── Order.php
│   │   ├── StockItem.php
│   │   └── StockTransaction.php
│   ├── Services
│   │   └── OrderUseCases.php
│   └── Types
│       ├── OrderStatus.php
│       ├── StockItemStatus.php
│       └── StockTransactionType.php
└── Infrastructure
    ├── MailingService.php
    ├── repositories
    │   └── Eloquent
    │       ├── EloquentMerchantRepository.php
    │       ├── EloquentOrderRepository.php
    │       ├── EloquentProductRepository.php
    │       ├── EloquentStockNotificationRepository.php
    │       └── EloquentStockRepository.php
    └── types
        └── LowStockNotificationType.php
```

The business logic — the rules and processes we all understand — is encapsulated within the `Domain` directory. This is the common language that resonates with developers, stakeholders, program managers, and everyone involved in the project. It serves as a foundational agreement that unites us in our shared understanding. This also helped in testing and verifying the entire domain logic before thinking about any infrastructure details. 

##### Key Components in the Domain

- Entities:

The heart of the domain is the entities. These hold essential data, representing real-world concepts like orders, ingredients, and the specifics of the food we love. These entities act as the backbone of the system, defining what data we work with and how it relates.

- Use Cases:
  
Within the `useCases`, we zoom in on specific scenarios, like creating an order. Here, use cases focus on the detailed steps and logic involved in executing a particular use case. This approach keeps our business logic organized and easy to follow.

- Isolation and Dependency Management
  
The domain is deliberately isolated, meaning it operates independently of any infrastructure-related logic. This isolation is intentional— it allows us to maintain a clear distinction between what our system does (business logic) and how it does it (infrastructure logic).
https://github.com/iifawzi/foodi/blob/0aa62ae42c20c732d817cde111b30b846647c1e0/src/Application/services/OrderService.php#L15-L26

- Dependency Injection: 

as the code above shows, to facilitate this separation, we adopt a dependency injection approach. Instead of the application layer reaching out to infrastructure components, dependencies are injected into it, thanks to the defined interfaces. 

This ensures flexibility and simplifies testing, as we can substitute real implementations with mocks, as we did in the integration tests. 
where the entire business logic is tested using `in-memory` database. More on that, in the `Testing and Quality` section below.  

https://github.com/iifawzi/foodi/blob/0aa62ae42c20c732d817cde111b30b846647c1e0/tests/Integration/Application/OrderServiceTest.php#L40-L54


The actual implementation of the repositories is on the infrastructure layer, where we can decide what to use, whether are we using `Eloquent` or any other solution, it doesn't matter. as long as they implement the repositories interfaces. 

##### Application layer: 

It mediates communication between core business logic (domain) and external systems (infrastructure), where i'm defining the `driven` ports, for external components to interact with the application layer.

The application layer is the layer that's responsible for the communication between the domain and the infrastructure, it defines the `driven` and `driving` ports. 
for simplification in this project, I didn't implement any `driving` ports, the application service communicates directly with the domain's service. `driven` ports are defined in the repositories directory, and the mail-service. these ports must be implemented by anyone willing to interact/to be managed with/by the domain. 

The application services are also infrastructure agnostic, hence you will notice that no `HTTP` errors are thrown for example, but instead domain responses are returned. 

https://github.com/iifawzi/foodi/blob/878ce9645f1655b725797233e122e71c468d004a/src/Application/services/OrderService.php#L57-L76

This gives us the flexibility of choosing any adapter in the infra, whether it's RPC, REST, or even socket layer. it doesn't matter. 

##### Infrastructure layer: 

Infrastructure layer is where the `adapters` are implements, here you can find all the `eloquent` implementations of the repositories as well as the mailing service implementation. The driving adapters ( controllers ) are defined in the core directory `app`. 

### System Architecture

Anticipating and mitigating Murphy's Law `if anything can go wrong, it will`, the system architecture takes into account potential challenges:

-   Concurrency Challenge: The system adeptly manages multiple orders simultaneously, ensuring data consistency even during peak times.

-   Mailing Service Reliability: Proactive measures are in place to address potential issues with sending emails. This includes scenarios where the mailing service is non-operational or the mailing queue experiences downtime.

By proactively addressing these challenges, the architecture aspires to furnish a Foodi Orders System characterized by reliability, resilience, and a seamless operational experience.
